This is the first book to have illustrations of the military nature.
And they're the first line illustrations.
Now, these are all incunables, you said, right?
These are all incunables.
And with this whole?
Just this section right here.
This whole section?
Yeah, we have 5,000 of them.
These are just some of the more famous ones.
You know what incunables are?
They're books published prior to 1500.
These are line engravings showing military apparatus.
It's considered the first great military book ever published.
And it's had a little bit, once again?
Oh, Volturi is day military, day ring military.
Yeah, they're batting rams.
They're really batting rams.
I've never seen them.
And that was probably contemporary military stuff.
I think Leonardo used this book, actually, as an example.
This is the great Subiaco.
We had the first book printed in Italy.
Oh, this really gets me.
We put these gaps here because of earthquakes.
We don't want them to fall off.
The last two earthquakes in Whittier and the one out in the valley, books tumble off.
We have a major one.
We just don't want to stick with the spines.
How far down are we again?
Two levels beneath the ground about what you said?
This was built and designed by Caltech.
Uh-huh, which is right down the street.
These are great early.
This is our English book collections here.
These are pre-1640 imprints.
And this is the heart and soul of our collections.
I was going to say one of the great strengths of the collection.
Yes, English books.
I mean, they're sensational books here.
There's the Hackwood's Voyages.
Oh, there's the Hackwood's Voyages.
This is the Bateman upon Bartholomew.
That's when Ship of Fools by Pinson.
You know, the primary fool is in the Ship of Fools.
The bibliomaniacs.
Is that right?
That's true.
That's right.
Anyway, there's a great thing.
These are great foreign books after 1500.
There's a wonderful Palladio.
There's Agricola.
Ray Metallica, the first engineering book on mining.
Isn't that the name of Hoover's collection over at Claremont?
Right.
He had it reprinted.
Uh-huh.
Then there's all kinds of things.
There's Martin Luther, and there's later editions of Don Quixote and Galileo's Dialogue.
Do you have the first Don Quixote?
No, no.
There's a story about that.
Huntington had it in the church collection, and an archer who started the Hispanic Society had an English edition of Don Quixote, so they traded it.
And that's now the Hispanic Society of New York.
There were only six of those.
Ah, yeah, they're very few.
Very few.
The Garden went for one and a half million.
The Garden City?
Yeah, 1.5 million.
Yeah.
To a Spanish collector.
Yeah, they're very, very hard.
Are these also in Canada?
These are early American books.
Most of these are from the church collection.
This is, let me show you.
I've got a couple here.
No, no, this is fine.
This is a very scarce book.
The University of Virginia and the Huntington's own account of this, as far as I can find out, in this country.
This is the prose, I mean the poetic account of Columbus's letter.
Oh.
Translated in 1495.
There's only a couple of these.
This is three years after the discovery.
Right, right.
Here's the illustration.
Woodcut.
It's a wonderful little book.
There's the translated from Latin into Italian whole poetry.
Who bound this, would you say?
Oh, this is late 19... It's typical church copy.
Oh, it's church.
Okay.
Here's his book plate.
And he had a lot of his books be done.
And give me just the title of it again.
It's Dottie's...
D-A-T-I.
Uh-huh.
It's his, I don't know the exact title.
How would you, what would you call it?
It's a poetic translation of the letter of Prince Christopher Columbus.
1495?
1495.
Printed where?
I think it's from Florence.
There it is right there.
Great book.
Congratulations.
One of only two?
In this country, as far as I've been able to find out right away, but there's other wonderful books here.
Alan, give me your title again.
And it's J-U-T-S-S-E-Z-I.
And your middle initial?
No, H. And you use two L's with Alan?
A-L-A-N.
These are the folio books.
We have all these copies of Ptolemy's Geography because the early maps of the New World are included in these.
Can we see one?
Let me see.
The great, brilliant one with the big... Well, these aren't real.
These are some of the later ones, actually.
Let me see.
This is worth a trip right here.
These are early, this looks like a Cortez letter.
Again, it came in the church collection.
How do you have these categorized?
These are all American books organized essentially by date.
1506 is the first one here.
And in this book, America is mentioned.
These are really accounts of the New World.
And this is Cortez's account of the conquering of Mexico City.
How do you feel when you handle these?
Even after all these years, it's wonderful.
See, there's the...
letter of Cortez telling about his experiences.
Cortez in the New World.
In the New World.
We have a big Columbus exhibit going up because we have such a wonderful collection.
Our collection is a lot like the New York public.
John Carter Brown.
This is the Elliott Indian Bible.
This is a later copy of it.
But we have all different kinds of things.
There's Almanacs.
This is the first, for example, this is the first road atlas ever printed in the New World, and it was, I mean, in America, and it was done about 17, this is about 1787.
It's beautiful.
Yeah, it just shows the road from New York.
How are those illustrations done?
I think they're in gray, Dutch.
This is the...
The first map ever done is 1780.
The manuscript map of Gilson's map of Kentucky.
You see all these poor Richard's almanacs.
These all came to the church sale.
Do you have a full run?
Pretty much full run.
You know, the library company doesn't, for instance, in Philadelphia.
There's children's books.
Here's a little children's book.
1775.
And again, most of them are church.
Oh, this is quite later, but even so.
We have the first known edition of Cinderella here.
It's The History of the Little Goody Two Shoes.
We don't have as large a collection of children's books, but we have some... Does it compare to the Morgans?
Morgans are pretty spectacular.
They got their, I think, from the ball.
But these are... We have a variety of copies.
Thomas Jefferson's own copy of the Journal of the House of Milk.
So we have a lot of books that are owned by important people.
This is the treasure room, would you say?
No, the vault is in there.
You want to go back there?
Yeah, maybe.
We came here just for this.
But we're two of the few people in the world that actually travel across the country to look at books.
mr jesse is now opening an enormous vault at least three feet thick you know the walls here are like eight or twelve feet you can see anyway
This is the treasure room.
And I would say, I would estimate about 18 feet by 12 feet.
Is that a fair estimate?
These are all the Shakespeare quartos.
These are all the Shakespeare folios.
This is the first.
This is the great dossier right here.
This is the first laws of the state of New York, of which I think there's only one other copy in the world.
Maybe not.
I think there's one other.
But it's published by Bradford in 1694.
It's a fairly bad shape.
That's darn close to being an American incunable.
Well, Michael Zinman, you know Michael?
Michael calls these things American, which is not bad, you know.
These, you know that big book we have at home, the white book, the facsimile of the Shakespeare Quarter at the Huntington Library, that's what these are from.
This is the great, this is the best copy we have.
It's missing a page, but it includes, it's in the original.
How many, first roll is, do you have?
Yeah, four.
This is the Bridgewater copy.
See, this is almost pretty much like it was originally.
Well, it looks like it's an original binding.
Yeah.
It is?
Pretty close.
The great English library he got was the Bridgewater Library, which is the greatest family library ever put together in England.
He bought it at Lock, Stock and Barrow in 1917.
There's the bookmark.
1917.
Can we just see the Drosshut portrait?
That'll always give us a little kick.
There it is.
See, it feels as though the book is actually... John, within seven years of figures death.
It just does it, doesn't it?
See, it's breaking right here.
It's broken a little more since I've been here.
I don't let it out.
Do you do any kind of repair on these?
Oh, yeah.
These copies of these books, here's the D, the Duke of Devonshire.
That was another great collection.
You have here Bridgewater Church in Devonshire.
There's all kinds of other books here.
This is the only known copy of Tom Jones in the original boards.
This is the great Getty's Burns, which includes maybe 20 or 30 manuscript poems by Burns.
Manuscript poems.
The Alice, the first Alice, the Letters of Cumbolumbus, the Besson book, the Letters of
The different editions of The Letters of Columbus.
There's one going on, so that's a Besson book.
This is a Besson book.
That's the first book printed in North America, period.
1629 or something like that?
1640.
The Elliot Bible.
This is a Mather Tracks that was actually owned by the family.
Of course, the American Antiquarian Society says this library.
Milton, the first of Walton's Angler.
The poem Tamerlane.
That's Tamerlane?
Yes, Tamerlane.
And these are all Pinson and Caxton, works of... Where are the Caxton's?
Right here.
First book printed in English language.
How many Caxton's here?
I don't know for sure.
He's England's first printer.
He's England's Gutenberg.
These are black books here.
What's the significance of that book of Key's poems?
It's probably on the regional boards and maybe a presentation copy.
It's not open.
It's my own now.
Okay.
Yeah, I don't know what this is.
It's an original board.
It looks like it's in pretty nice shape.
Yeah, it is.
Yeah, these are real, really cool actors.
Researchers, not students.
Researchers.
This side is all manuscripts.
We have the great collection of letters of Washington, Jefferson, and Lincoln.
Where's Franklin's autobiography?
It must be on display.
This is Walden by Thoreau.
Oh, that's the manuscripts?
Right.
This is one of the great literary manuscripts.
It wasn't finally deciphered until the 1950s.
That's Walden.
That's the manuscript.
That's Thoreau's hand writing.
It's about 900 or 1,000 pages, and it took him forever to figure out how he really evolved until they realized he started out with a very small version and kept building the building.
Was that acquired in Huntington's lifetime?
Oh, almost almost is.
Virtually always.
Not everything.
This is the Prince of the Popper, Mark Twain, Samuel Coltridge's
The Hotline Correspondents.
Hotline Correspondents, yeah, that's a great group of correspondents.
In the early Clemens Correspondents with the person who was on his trip to around the world with him.
There's the Manuscript of Lord of Doom.
This is pretty spectacular.
This is a pretty spectacular treasure in the world.
Oh yeah, those are early Portland charts, medieval manuscripts.
We have a great collection of English medieval manuscripts there.
They're the signers of the Declaration of Independence, came from Emmet.
You ever talk about Thomas Emmet?
Thomas Edison Emmet, a great collector.
His collection, I think, went from the New York Public.
But he put together sets like that.
These are medieval manuscripts in English, medieval manuscripts here.
A lot of books of ours, prayer books.
But there are also some wonderful English texts here.
We have, like, the prick of conscience.
We have some of the really wonderful collections.
It's all European.
There's no papyri or anything.
We have bits and pieces of things, but nothing.
Here's the wonderful thing.
George Washington's playing on Mount Vernon.
We have wonderful things related to Mount Vernon because Henry bought several big collections in Washington.
That's itself like HM 599.
HM is how he can make the script up there.
This is a treat.
How often do you come down here?
We occasionally get books for display.
We have the first hamlet.
You have both the good cordo and the bad cordo.
What if you have a scholar here from
from Cambridge or something and he wants to look at this.
Well, most of the time they won't, but if they're working on textual things, you want to see a mark or something, they'll ask for it and they'll want to see it for now.
These are all going to be published by University of California Press.
We spend a lot of time making things available to two presses.
And again, who owned those quartos?
Whose collection was that?
Well, basically, it's the Duke of Devonshire, Devonshire Library, Campbell Devonshire it's called, the Bridgewater Library.
There are several copies from the Pembroke, the Bridwell sale.
So it's a great variety of many people.
They sold a few duplicates.
The collection of quartos, I think,
is superior to the Folger, isn't it?
We don't have anyone near as many folios, but we've got a greater selection of quartos, if I remember correctly.
I have to be persuaded that you need 100-odd more folios, you know, other than to make a Henman accent.
That's right, that's right.
But the quartos is really very impressive.
OK, that's wonderful.
Boy, that's a thrill.
It is.
Even safe makers.
Bankers come in there, you know, when you get a repair, they say, what?
For books, right?
It's got to be oil.
You have what appears to be a pretty extensive book plate collection here, too.
Yeah, we've got a couple of big collections that people have given us, and they're not used very often.
But we do a book plate collection.
We have a lot of things given to us.
This is a collection, the Book of Common Prayer, that was given to us by former director, and there's Book of Common Prayer books of FDR, and there's miniatures, and there's all kinds of things in the collection.
You said just when we came down here that he really wasn't a treasure hunter?
Did you say that?
Well, no, he was not exactly.
He didn't collect exactly like Morgan did.
He was interested in the research library.
I've got a feeling he wanted to create the greatest research library on English and American literature in the world.
With the emphasis on research.
Yeah, with the emphasis much different than that.
Well, Mark.
Mark, oh.
He had a wonderful taste and really bought some of his memories.
Henry went out and bought whole libraries so that he could have all those English books.
Our strength is our pre-1800 English books.
Now we collect archival material related to California politics, Western water rights, mining in the American West, all that kind of thing.
We can order a bunch of research like very much different than the market.
How and why did he get interested in it?
And he seemed to have made his decision sometime in 1908, 1909, and he was going to do something like this.
When he was in advanced middle age, when he, number one, he inherited the will from Collins, his uncle.
Secondly, he settled in an area that he liked.
He settled in Southern California.
He had land holdings, tremendous land holdings, and he saw opportunity.
He liked Southern California, and he thought it would be a big, big, metropolitan area.
He was right.
And he was involved primarily through the Pacific Electric Railroad, which he built and which then
He had 24, 28 land companies in the area.
All over.
24, 28.
I'm not sure of the number.
I can't remember.
So he kind of semi-retired, but kept his hand in his land companies for the rest of his life.
The result was that he felt an obligation to do something, just like all the great philanthropists.
And I think he had an interest in literature.
and but he particularly liked these are the things that i think he liked he liked uh wonderful and beautiful books he liked um great literature and thirdly he liked material related to the founding fathers uh that's why we have such great washington and jefferson holdings and colonial holdings what when he bought the church he was buying what he was going to stay in the field he was going to stay in church had
American and English literature and historical material, and he had a couple of wonderful books of ours, and he had a couple of incunables, and that essentially is the parameters that he kept the rest of his collecting career.
So that's why I think the church is so important.
You see in some of the correspondence that, with Rosenbach particularly, and I suspect we might see this earlier with Smith, is that
Is he close yet to being as good as the British Library, or is he close yet to being the best in the world?
That's right.
I think he had the New York Public Library with the Astrid and Tilden collections to shoot against.
He had the British Libraries to go against, and he had collectors like Morgan.
Do you think he felt the competition with Morgan?
No, I don't think so.
I don't see it, but look at this.
This is the way the Cole, George Washington, Cole cataloged his collection, you see, that he bought.
Cole was his first librarian.
Cole was his first librarian he was hired in 1960.
So he would list a book like this and describe it.
What's the name of the catalog?
Oh, the catalog.
Because he used facsimiles.
And then he'd say other copies.
British Library, Booth, Rothschild, Lennox, Ayr Library.
See, immediately this was a book where compared, all the books in here were compared with copies of other places.
So he gave you kind of a mini census?
Yeah, this is one of the great catalogs ever produced because he gave you a census, and people like Bill Reese and all the major American county dealers frequently always referred to the church.
They'll say at the bottom, the Church 111 or something like that.
So, Henry Huntington loved this kind of comparison.
And that's when he hired people like Brigham.
He wanted to build the numbers.
Brigham brought back some pretty lousy copies compared to the rest of his library, but he bought back books that were hard to find at that stage.
He'd bought so many libraries by that time that he was looking for things that were tough to find, and so Clarence Brigham was able to do that.
This catalog and his attitude was to compare.
What volumes was that published?
Well, it was five American and two English.
Have you ever seen it offered for sale?
No, it sells for like $1,500 or something like that.
1907?
Yeah, 1907 and the other one is 1909 or 1910.
And then Church died.
The Church family, they showed up one time.
Well, they did.
They lived in New Jersey.
The Arm & Hammer Company operates out of New Jersey.
And they showed up one time, and it was great.
They came here?
Yeah.
And one of them remembered her father.
It was her father.
Oh, yeah, she was very sophisticated, Easterner, and she remembered her father riding around in Brooklyn.
E.D.
Church.
Eliudee Church.
You don't hear much about him when you hear of the great New York collectors.
I mean, Ho, usually, and Brayton Ives, and Beverly Chew, and all these other guys.
You know, those are the ones you hear of, but you're very... The only context you hear of this guy is because Huntington bought his, you know, on block.
Right.
You never hear of it because of, you know, he didn't, he wasn't, he didn't tout himself.
He worked through Dodd and Mead.
Which I noticed, right?
Yeah, Dodd and Mead.
Yeah, they have a... He bought most of his things through them.
and he was private collector like unlike other people he didn't have an auction you have an auction you're minutely famous that's correct let me let me go on we want to wait here for a while or let me go and get the uh the files for you i don't think he had uh the collector that i know very well is a man named henry wagner do you ever hear you know henry wagner was a big collector of western americana he had 13 different collections
And he gave his first one to Yale.
He worked for the Guggenheims and gave a big economics collection to Yale in, like, 1910.
He then lived on until he died at an age of 90-something in 1960.
He lived right down here in San Marino.
He knew Henry Huntington, and he bought things.
Americana, the Henry Huntington one.
They fought each other for Americana.
And he said,
Henry Huntington really didn't care for the American West or anything except these early documents.
And he was quite right.
He knew that he needed to collect them to have a great collection of Americana, so he did.
But Henry Wagner knew individual items.
He created the autobiographies.
He wrote about his books.
But Henry Huntington, on the Huntington other hand, knew a few books very well and enjoyed them.
One of the books he got was Science of Shakespeare, which was only a few copies, and that he looked at.
He looked at several other, George Washington's Genealogy.
I've got it written down here as well.
Those are the ones that he picked out to look at his first-rate collection.
But he wasn't that kind of a collector where he really dug into his books, because he had time on this that was against him.
He had to do all this very quickly.
And because he hired people to do a lot of his work.
But on the other hand, it's obvious he did a lot of his own buying.
There's no question about that.
He went through the whole catalogs, he went through this and that.
You see wires that Rosenbach gets, I mean, Western Union.
Yeah.
Listed one by the Senate.
There'll be 150 lots there that he wants to bid on.
And then he tells them how much he can bid on each lot.
Yeah.
You know, I mean, this is a man who's gone over every item in the catalog and has decided the things that he wants and how much he's willing to pay.
Right, right.
Absolutely.
Let me, let me, I gave a talk a couple of weeks ago on early Americana at the Huntington, and it details a lot of this stuff about church.
I'll make a copy of it.
That'd be great.
And, uh, I could bum a pencil.
Right.
Why don't you?
And, and how do I identify?
Well, I did, of course, say the same.
No, Huntington.
Now, they may have known each other by 1908.
The Poresale was a fine book sale, and Henry Huntington bought some books there.
By himself?
Or did he have an agent there?
He probably had an agent.
Now, who it was, I'm not sure of.
Do you think that Smith actually bought it and sold it to Huntington, or do you think it's in the cover?
No, you see the contract here.
Okay.
So this article and this contract, we'd have to read the two.
Yeah, it's not clear to me right away what the relationship is, but obviously Honey brought it directly from the church estate, and Smith was somehow involved in it, obviously because he said he originally had purchased it.
I'm going to put a little piece of paper for that article.
They got papers of reading colonial... Just put that close name on.
They got papers after 1920.
Because he had a professional staff, they were able to search out and find archives, papers, and lesser-valued libraries, more historically-oriented libraries.
But all the same, he was buying big Civil War libraries.
He was buying so many things in Brock to really create a research lab.
It comes out in the paper here that I point out that most of the great early colonial papers that we got with the Huntington came after 1920 when he had a staff in place.
Was that in addition to the 1570s?
Yeah.
He started collecting when he was 50.
It's vague, you know.
Actually, I said in the Times piece, he didn't become a serious collector until 55, and I gave myself an out on that.
Yeah.
I mean, right, right.
The serious is after the poor, the poor live collection sale was in 1908, and 1910 was the, was the hole in that church.
Yeah.
You just leave it tight if you want something.